                      REPORTS

The report writer  function found in Schooner is the
same  one  provided  by  the  Clipper(r)  Summer  87
system. It is provided here for your convenience.


F2 Report Layout:

Provides "get boxes"  to hold specifications for the
page header,  the page  width, the  left margin, the
lines  per page,  line spacing,  page ejects,  and a
plain page  format. Plain page  means that the date,
time and page numbers are not printed.


F3 Report Group:

Specify  an  expression to  act  as  a  report group
break. A  break occurs  whenever the  current record
and the record's key expression are not equal to the
previous record's  key expression. This  can be used
to separate and  subtotal groups of records based on
a key value.


F4 Report Field Definition:

Define  expressions  that  are  translated  into the
detail  lines.  This can  be  any  legal expression.
Because reports  are not compiled  into the Schooner
system, you  must refer  only to  functions that are
documented in Schooner  and not just any DBASE(r) or
Clipper(r) function.  It is recommended  that you do
not reference Schooner  UDF() user defined functions
without very good testing.


F5 Report Delete:

Erases the current field definition.


F6 Report Insert:

Adds a report field into the report format.


F7 Report Go to:

Allows you  to jump from one  field to another. PgUp
and PgDn will  move you one field  at a time, but F7
can be faster.


F10 Report Save:

Saves the report in .FRM format.






                       LABELS

The label  writer function found  in Schooner is the
same  one  provided  by  the  Clipper(r)  Summer  87
system. It is provided here for your convenience.


F2 Label Toggle:

Allows you  to switch  back and  forth between label
field creation and formatting.


F3 Label Formats:

Allows  you  to  select  on  of  five  common  label
formats.


F10 Label Exit:

Saves your label format in .lbl format and exits the
label writer.


Note:  Commas  found  in  a  label  line  act  as  a
terminator. Anything to the right is ignored. If you
wish to  use a  comma in  a label,  surround it with
quotes or  define a MV  variable as a  comma and use
it.


































