HELPSYS 2.0

(c)1994 - Jeff Lewis

------------------------------------------------------------------------

HelpSys 2.0 Function Library

	This product is being released as a Shareware product.  This 
means that this version of the program may be freely copied and 
evaluated by anyone.  If you decide that this product will suit your 
needs, simply send a $30.00 donation to us and we will send you a more 
powerful version of the software that lets you have more control.  Also 
included will be several functions that allow window manipulation, 
printing and video stack saving.  These will be documented and include 
sample programs on usage.

	This HelpSys module was designed for quick and easy help 
screens without adding a single line of code to your Clipper 5.01 or 
Clipper 5.2 application.  Simply link in the object file, include the 
HELPSYS2.LIB file and create your help text file.  That's all there is to 
it. You'll have field level help with out much work or effort on your 
part.

	The Shareware version does NOT contain any of the help 
control modules or window printing modules.  This version is also 
slightly crippled, when pressing F1 to invoke the help screen(s), you 
can only bring up the help screens a total of 10 times per application 
execution.  This should be more than sufficient for your testing.  Also, 
upon registering, for an additional $10.00 I will send you full source 
code that you can modify as needed.  I know that when developing, I 
always feel more comfortable about my application when using libraries 
that I have control over.  You will not be allowed to distribute the 
source code or object code for the registered version of this software.

	Registered users of HelpSys 1.1 can upgrade for the difference 
price ($10.00).  Also, upon registering, if you’ve received source code 
for HelpSys 1.1, you will also receive source code for 2.0 for no 
additional cost to you.

Features:
	Press F1 for help from ANY screen and field
	On-Line help without ANY additional programming
	Field Level Help with a professional look
	Procedural level help for non-field entries
	Capable of Several Screens of help per field, not just one line
	Intelligent help window moving when help window covers the current field
	Multi-level Help
	Automatic  Help Topics index is displayed when no further help
	           is available
	Toggle between Development and User modes while developing on-line help

Additional Features after registering:
	Window and Text Color Control
	Window Positioning Control
	Generic Window functions that can be used in your own programs
	(including printing within a window)
	Video Stack function calls
	Database Stack function calls
	Quick Alert Printing function
	DOCUMENTATION
	[Optional Source Code written entirely in Clipper]


Why should I register?

	I feel that after all this work and effort, $30.00 is a minimal 
charge for providing such capabilities (+ $10.00 if you want the source 
code).  There are several other routines that I've written over the past 
several years that I'll plan on releasing as Shareware (including software 
security routines).  This is to everyone’s advantage.

	When registering, please provide me with your Compuserve or 
Internet account name or address if you have one.

Jeff Lewis
P.O. Box 441456
Indianapolis, Indiana  46244

CIS: 70711,3030                      INTERNET: 
JLEWIS@INDYCMS.IUPUI.EDU


HelpSys 2.0 - For the Developer

	Initially you will need to tell HelpSys 2.0 that you are a 
developer.  You can do this by setting the environment variable 
HELPMODE to any value at the command prompt.

	i.e.

	SET HELPMODE=DEVELOPER

	Once this has been entered and HelpSys2 is invoked (via the 
F1 key) you will see a message appear in the upper left corner of the 
screen [Developer Mode].  This enables you to press F1 anytime you 
want to edit existing help or create additional help screens.  When a 
new help screen is created, you will be notified via an alert.  You can 
then edit the help (or blank help window) and press ESC when done.  It 
will automatically be saved at that point.

	The F2 key is available to toggle between Developer mode and 
User mode.  When in Developer mode, you can add Help Screens.  
When in the User mode, when no more help is available, a Help Topics 
list will automatically appear or all available help.  Also, since the 
HELPMODE was defined you can delete unwanted Help Screens by 
pressing the DEL key on the highlighted help topic and confirming the 
‘Are you sure you want to delete this entry?’ question.

	The Help Topics list will appear when no help is available 
while HELPMODE has not been assigned (no deleting will be allowed 
if HELPMODE is not defined) or while in User mode.  The help topic 
is ALWAYS the FIRST LINE IN THE HELP SCREEN.

Program Notes:

	When Linking include HELPSYS.OBJ with your program and 
include HELPSYS2.LIB

RTLINK FILE TEST.OBJ,HELPSYS.OBJ LIB HELPSYS2
or
BLINKER FI TEST.OBJ HELPSYS.OBJ LIB HELPSYS2
